**What data to use**

- Student assessment results
- Student demographic data

*Data shown are based on anonymized, measured results.*

**How do I use this visualization?** 
In this visualization, each section of the circle represents the students that are part of that group. The portion of the circle conveys how large of a segment that group is in the class. The distance of the portion from the center represents the mean of the results of the students in that particular group. Also provided through the form of error bars is the standard deviation for each group. 
This visualization lets you see how each group is performing in comparison to each other, while also gaining a sense of the size of each group. 
*Viewers should be cautious however* with the error bars, since grade distributions do not tend to look like perfect normal distributions. 
In this example visualization we see that the second highest portion of the class, the BSCH students, seem to be doing the worst on average. While the highest, the BSCH students, are fairing a lot better and much closer to the other groups. And overall, although small, the BCMPH students are doing better than all other groups. 

**Why did we select this visualization?**
The primary goal of this question is to see whether there is any relatinoship between a certain student groouping and overall performance. Bars are the simplest way to present a mean and standard deviation. 
Using a circular coordinate system makes it more immediately apparent that the groups are part of a whole. The gradient colour scale also makes it apparent that there is an order to the groupings. 